# Bali MEI practical demonstration

### Creating a virus genome from FASTQ reads

Here we'll go through the steps taken to quality control reads that have been generated by a MiSeq run, and create a consensus genome.

These steps require you to run commands in a UNIX-based operating system, for example a Mac OS or Linux. For this practical I will assume you are using a Mac OS.

I would **strongly** recommend that you familiarise yourself with working on the command-line by following the `Learn the Command Line` course at CodeCademy: https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-the-command-line

1. Download the necessary files to follow this demonstration by clicking on the `Download ZIP` file at the top right of the main page.

2. Open the `Terminal` app, which gives you access to the command-line environment that we will be working in. in `Finder` it's located under `Applications/Utilities/Terminal.app`.

3. Move to the folder you downloaded in step 1:

  `cd /Downloads/Bali-MEI-demonstration/FASTQ-to-FASTA/`

  In here you'll see a folder containing the NGS reads in a compressed FASTQ file. There are 2 files: `83_S1_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz` contains the forward reads while `83_S1_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz` contains the reverse reads of this paired-end run.

4. Check a read of one of the files by displaying the first 4l ines of the file:

  `gunzip -c 83_S1_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz | head -4`

  You should see the following:

  ```
  @M00221:25:000000000-ABVKB:1:1101:17060:1399 1:N:0:1
  AGCGAAAGCAGGGGGTTTTACTTTCTGCTCAGTTTTGCTGTAAGCCAAAACTCCTCTAAAGAAAGATGTATATGAAAGAAGGAAGAGATAGAAAGGCTGAGAACTACCAAGGCTAAAACTTCCCTGATCCTATAACCTCAAACACAAACAG
  +
  CCCCCCCBFFFCGGGGGGGGGGHHGHHHHHHHHGHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHGHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHGHHHHHHEGHGHHHHHFHHHHHHFHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHGHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHGHHHE
  ```

  The first line contains the unique read header, the second line is the sequence. The `+` marks the end of the sequence and the beginning of the quality scores for each base in the sequence.
